## Version 0.4.0

- [🚨Breaking change: Compile-time checks for RTTI operators](#0.4.0--note-0)
- [🆕Quoted character syntax <code>char&#x27;a&#x27;</code>](#0.4.0--note-1)
- [🚨Breaking change: backed <code>class</code> properties now appear in parenthesized constructor](#0.4.0--note-2)
- [Control flow revamped in frontend](#0.4.0--note-3)
- [Extension functions allow extensions to method call syntax](#0.4.0--note-4)
- [<code>break</code> and <code>continue</code> work in <code>for (… of …)</code> loop bodies](#0.4.0--note-5)
- [🚨Breaking change: <em>StringSlice</em> removed in favor of indexed <em>String</em>s](#0.4.0--note-6)
- [<em>@json</em> type declaration decorator](#0.4.0--note-7)
- [Null-aware handling](#0.4.0--note-8)
- [Default arguments requested by null](#0.4.0--note-9)
- [Preview: Rust backend](#0.4.0--note-10)
- [Sorting](#0.4.0--note-11)
- [Support <em>src</em> dir](#0.4.0--note-12)
- [🆕<em>std/strings</em>'s <em>StringBuilder</em> allows composing strings](#0.4.0--note-13)
- [Preview: Name selection and &quot;temper.keep/&quot;](#0.4.0--note-14)
- [🚨Breaking change: visibility notations required on class members](#0.4.0--note-15)
- [🚨Breaking change: Use <code>when</code> for pattern matching](#0.4.0--note-16)


<a id="0.4.0--note-0" name="0.4.0--note-0"></a>

### 🚨Breaking change: Compile-time checks for RTTI operators

Previously, Temper had no checks as to whether a runtime-type
information (RTTI) check could be subject to false positives.

Consider the following:

```temper inert
let a = when (x) {
  is String  -> "String";
  is Int     -> "Int";
  is Float64 -> "Float64";
  else       -> "Other";
};

let b = when (x) {
  is Float64 -> "Float64";
  is Int     -> "Int";
  is String  -> "String";
  else       -> "Other";
};
```

`a` and `b` should be the same, per Temper semantics, because there is
no Temper value that is more than one of (*Float64*, *Int*, *String*).

But in many programming languages' runtimes, there isn't enough
information to distinguish these values reliably:

- in JavaScript, the *number* type spans floating and integer types.
- in Perl and PHP, the same scalar type is used for all three; there
  are approximate predicates for making distinctions but these are
  not reliable, especially for values that enter from external target
  language code.

In Perl, for example, given `my $x = 1;` we might get
`$a == "String" && $b == "Float64"` though `1` looks integer-esque.

Now, Temper performs long planned restrictions on type casting and
checking.
Backends only need to be able to distinguish between and unconnected
types (those translated from Temper types) and those explicitly
marked with `@mayDowncastTo(true)`.

Now, the above code leads to compile-time errors, but we preserve
some RTTI distinctions.

Temper's long-term goal is for type matches (as above) and the
`.is<Type>()` RTTI predicate and `.as<Type>()` checked cast to allow
distinguishing variants of sealed types, and to work with unconnected,
Temper defined types, and to allow distinguishing *(T | Null)* from *(T)*
for all non-null *T*.


<a id="0.4.0--note-1" name="0.4.0--note-1"></a>

### 🆕Quoted character syntax `char'a'`

The `char` string tag can be followed by exactly one quoted code-point
and resolves to that code-point's integer value.

It interoperates with code-point related:
*String.fromCodePoint*, *String.fromCodePoints*, and
*StringBuilder.appendCodePoint*, and *String.codeAt*.

```temper
console.log("A: ${ char'A'.toString() }");
// Logs "A: 65"
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-2" name="0.4.0--note-2"></a>

### 🚨Breaking change: backed `class` properties now appear in parenthesized constructor

Previously, any backed properties declared in a class would become
constructor parameters.  And a property with an `=` expression
corresponds to an optional constructor parameter with a default
expression.

```temper
class C {
  public let a: Int;
  public let b: Int;
  public let sum: Int = a + b;
}

let c = {
  a: 1,
  b: 2,
  sum: 4,
};

console.log(c.sum.toString());
```

This made it hard to specify properties that were not overridable by
explicit constructor parameters.

Now, a `class` declaration can include parentheses and formal
parameters there specify both constructor parameters and backed
properties.

```temper
class C(
  public let a: Int, // comma separates
  public let b: Int,
) {
  public let sum: Int = a + b;
}

let c = {
  a: 1,
  b: 2,
  // sum not allowed here
};

console.log(c.sum.toString());
```

A new `@noProperty` decorator allows specifying a constructor parameter
that does not have a backed property auto-created.

```temper
// Accepts a list or a mutable list builder but stores a list.
class SomeStrings(
  @noProperty strings: Listed<String>
) {
  public strings: List<String> = strings.toList();
}

let myListBuilder = new ListBuilder<String>();
myListBuilder.add("Hello");

let ss = { strings: myListBuilder };
console.log(ss.strings.is<List<String>>().toString()); //!outputs true
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-3" name="0.4.0--note-3"></a>

### Control flow revamped in frontend

A large scale reorganization of the Temper frontend changes the
intermediate representation of control flow.
This change is aimed at enabling feature work but there are a
number of user visible changes.

#### Capture of local variables in loop bodies

```temper
let lb = new ListBuilder<fn (): Int>();
for (var i = 0; i < 10; ++i) {
  // Locals declared in loop bodies are captured separately per iteration.
  let j = i + 1;
  lb.add(fn (): Int { j });
}
let ls = lb.toList();
ls.forEach { (element: fn (): Int);;
  console.log(element().toString(10));
}
```

Previously, running that in `temper repl` output `10 10 10 10 ... 10` but
now, that outputs `1 2 3 4 ... 10`.

#### Explicit `return bubble()` is equivalent to implicit return of `bubble()`

Previously, these two functions translated subtly differently.

```temper
// Explicit return
let f1(): Bubble { return bubble() }

// Implicit return
let f2(): Bubble { bubble() }
```

The *bubble* function produces no usable value and, when it appears
inside the left of an *orelse*, jumps to the right.

Now, *bubble* is consistently recognized as ending a branch of control
flow without a need to capture a result.

This makes it easier to write backends for languages with strict
"no dead code after `throw`" policies, and leads to more idiomatic
code in existing backends.

#### Fewered labeled break statements in generated code

Previously, our intermediate representation required decompiling
a control-flow graph to recover structured flow control
(`if`, `while`, `break`, `continue`).

The decompiler introduced some labeled blocks in situations where
they were not strictly necessary: nested loops with complex
interactions.

This should lead to more idiomatic translation on many backends
and more performant translation on un-optimized Python, a language
which does not support labeled blocks.


<a id="0.4.0--note-4" name="0.4.0--note-4"></a>

### Extension functions allow extensions to method call syntax

Previously `subject.verb(object)` syntax worked only when `subject`'s
type declared a method named `verb`.

Now, regular functions can be declared with the `@extension` decorator
and participate in the same syntax.

```temper
class C {
  public isExtension(): Boolean { false }
}

@extension("isExtension")
let otherIsExtension(
    s: String // The first argument is the subject
): Boolean { true }

!(new C().isExtension()) && // Regular method call
"Hello".isExtension()       // Invoking a regular function with dot syntax
```

Similarly, `@staticExtension` allows extending
`SubjectType.verb(object)` syntax.  The `@staticExtension` decorator
takes a subject type and the verb text.

```temper
@staticExtension(Int, "three")
let intThree(): Int { 3 }

Int.three() == 3
```

See the documentation for `@extension` and `@staticExtension`
for more details.


<a id="0.4.0--note-5" name="0.4.0--note-5"></a>

### `break` and `continue` work in `for (… of …)` loop bodies

`for (let x of subject) { body }` is syntactic sugar for
`subject.forEach { (x);; body }`.

Normally, `break` and `continue` statements have to appear directly
within the same function as the loop.
Since `.forEach` is a method, it's body is defined on `subject`'s type.

Now, `.forEach` method implementations can opt into inlining.
When they do not require any `private` implementation details of the
type, their bodies can be inlined allowing `break` and `continue` to
appear to Temper backends as part of the same function body.

Previously the below would have been an error, but now it logs the
even numbers from the list.

```ts
for (let i of [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]) {
  if ((i & 1) == 1) {
    continue
  }
  console.log(i.toString())
}
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-6" name="0.4.0--note-6"></a>

### 🚨Breaking change: *StringSlice* removed in favor of indexed *String*s

Previously, Temper provided multiple *StringSlice*s types for string
processing tasks.

Those have been removed, and *StringIndex* allows for string processing.

*StringIndex* connects to *Int* or *size_t* types in target languages,
but the precise relationship between the integral value depends on
the target language's "native" string encoding.

```temper
let s = "Blah blah Hello, World!";
// The below logs "Hello, World!"
var idx = String.begin;  // An index at the start
while (idx < s.end) { // Still in the string
  if (s[idx] == char'H') {
    console.log(s.slice(idx, s.end));
    break;
  }

  idx = s.next(idx); // Step forward one code-point
}
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-7" name="0.4.0--note-7"></a>

### *@json* type declaration decorator

Applying *@json* to a type declaration adds instructions for
encoding/decoding instances of the type to/from JSON.

```temper
// JSON definitions are from std/json
let {
  InterchangeContext,
  NullInterchangeContext,
  JsonTextProducer,
  parseJson,
} = import("std/json");

// @json applies to class and interface declarations
@json class Point {
  public x: Int;
  public y: Int;
}

let myPoint = new Point(1, 2);
// JSON adapters allow encoding
let myJsonTextProducer = new JsonTextProducer();
Point.jsonAdapter().encodeToJson(
  myPoint,
  jsonTextProducer
);
console.log(myJsonTextProducer.toJsonString());
//!outputs "{\"x\":1,\"y\":2}"

// They also allow decoding
let anotherPoint = Point.jsonAdapter().decodeFromJson(
  "{\"x\":3,\"y\":4}",
  NullInterchangeContext.instance
);
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-8" name="0.4.0--note-8"></a>

### Null-aware handling

Temper now has limited flow typing for null-checked branches. For example, this
is now legal:

```temper
let maybeReportNegative(a: Int | Null): Void {
  // So far, support is limited to a simple check against a single name.
  if (a != null) {
    // We know *a* isn't null here, so we can use it as type Int.
    console.log((-a).toString());
  } else {
    console.log("not an int");
  }
}
```

Further, similar to operators in JS and other languages, Temper now has
operators for explicitly managing null values. Here are examples:

```temper
let maybeLength(a: String | Null): Int | Null {
  // Because of non-null inference on simple names, `a.end` is ok here.
  a?.countBetween(String.begin, a.end)
}

let chainMore(a: String | Null): String {
  (maybeLength(a)?.max(0) ?? -1).toString()
}
```

Specifically, these operators have been added:

- `?.` null chaining, where the right-hand side is evaluated only when the
  left side is non-null. If the left is null, the resulting value is also null.
- `??` null coalescing, where the right-hand side is the alternate value
  provided when the left side is null. Some languages use the token `?:` rather
  than `??` for similar semantics.


<a id="0.4.0--note-9" name="0.4.0--note-9"></a>

### Default arguments requested by null

To simplify optional arguments, Temper now indicates excluded arguments by
passing in a null value. This is carried through to all backends. Optional
parameters are always nullable, and if a null argument is supplied, the default
value is provided internally. For example, for this function:

```temper
let intName(i: Int, name: String = i.toString()): Pair<Int, String> {
  new Pair(i, name)
}
```

Here are examples from the repl:

```temper
$ intName(1, "one")
interactive#10: {class: Pair__32, key: 1, value: "one"}
$ intName(1)
interactive#11: {class: Pair__32, key: 1, value: "1"}
$ intName(1, null)
interactive#12: {class: Pair__32, key: 1, value: "1"}
```

And here's an example translation to Java, including a generated overload:

```java
public static Entry<Integer, String> intName(int i__1, @Nullable String name__4) {
    String t_19;
    String name__2;
    if (name__4 == null) {
        t_19 = Integer.toString(i__1);
        name__2 = t_19;
    } else {
        name__2 = name__4;
    }
    return new SimpleImmutableEntry<>(i__1, name__2);
}
public static Entry<Integer, String> intName(int i__1) {
    return intName(i__1, null);
}
```

Or to Python:

```py
def int_name(i: 'int', name: 'Union[str, None]' = None) -> 'Pair[int, str]':
  _name: 'Union[str, None]' = name
  t: 'str'
  name: 'str'
  if _name is None:
    t = int_to_string(i)
    name = t
  else:
    name = _name
  return pair(i, name)
```

Prior to this change, unset arguments had specialized semantics within the
interpreter and inconsistent handling across backends.


<a id="0.4.0--note-10" name="0.4.0--note-10"></a>

### Preview: Rust backend

An incomplete Rust backend is available. You can manually build to Rust with
`temper build -b rust`, but it's not included in default build targets and still
has a number of bugs and unfinished features.


<a id="0.4.0--note-11" name="0.4.0--note-11"></a>

### Sorting

Both in-place and non-destructive sorting are now built in. Sorting is also
stable. That is, order for values considered equal by the comparer remain
unchanged. Here is an example:

```temper
class Entry(
  public id: Int,
  public group: Int,
) {
  public toString(): String {
    "{ id: ${id.toString()}, group: ${group.toString()} }"
  }
}

let entries = [
  { id: 0, group: 0 },
  { id: 1, group: 1 },
  { id: 2, group: 2 },
  { id: 3, group: 0 },
  { id: 4, group: 1 },
  { id: 5, group: 2 },
].toListBuilder();

let sortedEntries = entries.sorted { (a, b);; a.group - b.group };
console.log(sortedEntries.join("\n") { (a);; a.toString() })
```

This is guaranteed to log the following message on all backends:

```
{ id: 0, group: 0 }
{ id: 3, group: 0 }
{ id: 1, group: 1 }
{ id: 4, group: 1 }
{ id: 2, group: 2 }
{ id: 5, group: 2 }
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-12" name="0.4.0--note-12"></a>

### Support *src* dir

Temper now recognizes a subdir called *src* in project structure if no config
is already in the current dir or higher. Creating a *src* dir is also now the
default behavior of `temper init`. For example:

```bash
~/whatever/blah$ temper init
Initialized new Temper project "blah" in /home/tom/whatever/blah
~/whatever/blah$ find -type f
./src/blah.temper.md
./src/config.temper.md
~/whatever/blah$ temper build
~/whatever/blah$ ls temper.out/js/blah
index.js  index.js.map  package.json
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-13" name="0.4.0--note-13"></a>

### 🆕*std/strings*'s *StringBuilder* allows composing strings

The *StringBuilder* type connects to the standard library type
of the same name in Java and C#, and connects to efficient
left-to-right string composition idioms in dynamic language
backends.

```temper
let { StringBuilder } = import("std/strings");

let sb = new StringBuilder();
sb.append("Hello, ");
sb.append("World");
sb.appendCodePoint(char'!');

// Logs "Hello, World!"
console.log(sb.toString());
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-14" name="0.4.0--note-14"></a>

### Preview: Name selection and "temper.keep/"

Each Temper backend has to handle name style conversion and also choosing names
to address conflict with backend language rules. For example, *switch* is a
keyword in some languages but not others. Name choices also might vary from
build to build.

To stabilize name choices and provide user customization over name selection, we
have begun saving name choices at build time. Some items of note:

- Names are saved in directory `temper.keep/` as a placeholder for
  build-generated files that should be kept in source control in the future.
- However, the data stored here is currently in preview, so it should be ignored
  until some future release.
- The `temper.keep/` name, as well as `temper.out/`, might change its name or
  structure in future releases.
- Temper doesn't yet load or use saved name choices at this time.

In other words, this is an experiment toward features in future releases.


<a id="0.4.0--note-15" name="0.4.0--note-15"></a>

### 🚨Breaking change: visibility notations required on class members

Previously, if a class definition member was missing a notation, the
member defaulted to `private`.

```temper
class C {
  f(): Int { 42 }
  public g(): Int { f() }
}
```

Now, all class members require a visibility notation: one of `public`,
`private`, or `protected`.

```diff
 class C {
-  f(): Int { 42 }
+  private f(): Int { 42 }
   public g(): Int { f() }
 }
```


<a id="0.4.0--note-16" name="0.4.0--note-16"></a>

### 🚨Breaking change: Use `when` for pattern matching

The builtin `match` has changed to `when` to reduce risk of collision with local
declarations called `match`, such as for instances of regex `Match`. Another
potential collision is for methods or functions named `match`. It was already
possible to work around collisions using `builtins.match`, but `when` seems much
less likely to collide with useful names in other code.

*Old* example with `match`:

```temper inert
let description = match (2) {
  0 -> "none";
  1, 2, 3 -> "little";
  else -> "lots or negative";
};
```

*New* example with `when`:

```temper inert
let description = when (2) {
  0 -> "none";
  1, 2, 3 -> "little";
  else -> "lots or negative";
};
```

Some options considered:

- `case` - Used to lead pattern matching blocks in some languages but carries
  different expectations in C-based syntax.
- `match` - The existing name is consistent with the [TC39 proposal][tc39-match]
  and several existing languages, but it has the collision risk previously
  discussed. The TC39 proposal uses `when` in place of common switch `case`, but
  it's also just a proposal rather than an accepted feature.
- `when` - Already used in Kotlin in similar ways. Used in other languages for
  match guards, which we eventually want in Temper. The corresponding
  placeholder keyword for match guards in Temper is now `given`.
- `switch` - Already a keyword in several common languages but possibly carries
  mental semantic baggage that are incompatible with Temper usage.

Given these options, we decide `when` is the most practical name to lea pattern
matching blocks.

[tc39-match]: https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pattern-matching?tab=readme-ov-file#examples-5
